The created model now requires much more detailed information on process-specific wastewater composition than previously. I am generally a supporter of more complex modelling, but in this case I have to ask how a user of this tool is supposed to provide the information the modellers require of them.  Some of these parameters I have never seen reported in process-specific sources characterising wastewaters. How shall a user be able to provide these? Usually one is lucky to get data on either, COD, BOD, DOC, *or* TOC for a process-specific wastewater. With the created model one needs data for BOD *and* COD for the process-specific wastewater, while data on TOC or DOC cannot be entered, which limits the useable literature sources even more. Furthermore, data on sCOD, sBOD, TSS, VSS, rbCOD, VFA, bCOD_BOD_ratio is all *required* to be inputted by the user to characterise any carbon compounds in the WW. 

It is not possible to enter a "not available" for any of these and let the model complement missing data with generic data (like it was possible for COD, BOD, DOC or TOC in the old model). In my opinion it is almost assured that it won't be possible to find all the required data and parameters characterising a process-specific wastewater. Even if such data is available for the average WWTP input for the working point, i.e. influent 2  (which can however be doubted as well) it will be close to impossible to find for a process-specific wastewater. So, if I ask myself "Is the model practicable in its present form?" (and even ignoring important missing features like actually creating an ES2 inventory file, or saving and storing an enetred WW composition or technology mix, or that we skipped the actually necessary sludge disposal quite early on) the answer is no.
 
Not only on a practicable level the created model is unsuitable, I have also problems on the conceptual level: Introducing marginal models  (e.g. inventory = additional emission per additional production) into a database that features only attributional inventories (e.g. inventory = Total annual emission/total annual production) is a mismatch of concepts at a fundamental level. However useful or desirable such models appear to practitioners, in ecoinvent they are misplaced. For this reason I can only strongly discourage attempts to use the present model in ecoinvent. I thought back in November we agreed that modelling of multi-input processes (e.g. the WWTP) should as always be performed in a top-down, attributional manner (splitting up, based on mass accounting), not in a marginal modelling approach. It is disappointing for me that the project workers defied this decision. The present results are faulty, since they create or destroy matter in a physically impossible way (see examples below). So the model is not usable, even if one is interested in marginal results outside of ecoinvent.

Also any negative emissions cannot be entered in ecoinvent, since a lognormal distribution cannot have values below zero.
Uncertainty calculations have not been included. They are a required part of a valid inventory.

Further remarks:

As already remarked above: Saving and opening WWTP settings, WW compositions is still missing. Anything has to be entered manually and remembered externally (I already remarked this 27th Oct 2017).

It is possible to enter negative concentrations in the input, e.g -10 mg COD/m3 (and get results). This makes no sense.

Sludge output is given as a mixture of WW input parameters, like COD, TKN. Required would be a mass composition like carbon, nitrogen, water content etc.

fossil vs biogenic carbon is not distinguished, neither in inputs not in outputs. This is a base requirement for ecoinvent emissions of CO2 and CH4. 


I did a simple test: Adding pure water as influent 1 (setting all concentrations to zero) I would expect the inventory (contribution of Influent 1 in kg/d) to be quite empty. But it is far from that. Apparently adding water in a WWTP causes it to suck pollutants from sludge and air (see minus signs) and redistribute it into the plant's effluent (and, since the mass balance for COD doesn't add up, also 10% into nothing). I cannot fathom what these results should signify. This is not sensible. Not only but also because it violates mass balances.




The troubles do not stop there: with still only pure water added in influent 1, I can change the parameter bCOD_BOD_ratio of influent 1 from 1.6 to 1.8 and by doing only this I get significantly different results (i.e. at same Q1):


The bCOD_BOD_ratio parameter of influent 1 should have no effect in this situation whatsoever, since there is no COD or BOD in the influent 1 that could be affected. It is still only pure water I am adding as influent 1. But the modelling suggests there are apparently different types of "pure water". And with a bCOD_BOD_ratio of 1.8 I am supposed to accept that COD is now taken from effluent and sludge (not air and sludge as before) and redistributed into air. In this transfer 30% of the COD disappears into nothingness... 
For nitrogen the reverse of the situation before is happening: nitrogen is taken from the effluent (minus sign) and put into sludge. For phosphorus the supposed transfer direction is still the same (sludge to effluent), but somehow 4% more phosphorus is added to the effluent than taken from the sludge. So: adding water to a WWTP causes it to create phosphorus out of nothing. Again a clear violation of mass conservation.

One might counter that the model is not made to inventory treatment of pure water. To this I reply: 
a) "treatment of wastewater, unpolluted..." is part of the ecoinvent database. The old WWT tool was able to calculate this treatment sensibly and it can be expected that the new tool should be able to produce sensible results for this too.

b) Many process-specific WW compositions have only a few pollutants. If I have for instance a WW with only nitrogen in it (zero COD or BOD), the new model will produce those strange COD results including the mass conservation violations (and again depending on how the bCOD_BOD_ratio parameter of influent 1 is set, which should absolutely not play a role here).



Since these simple results already display violations of fundamental physical principles, I have not spent more time in investigating whether the modelled technology modules are sensible or not. 


My impression of the created model is that the creators had a elaborate model for the WWTP process as a whole and technology modules and coded it into the tool. But they failed to work sufficiently on the actual core purpose of the tool, which is creating inventories for disposal of a process-specific wastewater, that represents a part of the input to the WWTP. This is evidenced by various missing parts (sludge disposal is missing, an inventory per m3 is missing, ability to save WW compositions and technology mixes is missing, actual ES2 output is missing, basic ecoinvent conventions like fossil/non-fossil carbon are missing etc.). Modelling the average WWTP working point is only the start of this task, not the end. I have the impression the participants underestimated the intended task. The tool as it is now cannot be used for its requested purpose and the results are not suitable for ecoinvent. Since the work is apparently already overbudget, I would discourage more work to be spent on a fundamentally flawed implementation.

Best regards,

Gabor
